"BBC News, Tiếng Việt - Skip to see content

Sections: Main News Vietnam World Economy Sports Video

Main News Vietnam World Economy Sports Video

Taiwan Election: Who are the candidates and why the world needs to care?

Image Source, Getty Images

Image capture, Presidential candidates in Taiwan, from left to right: Lai Ching-te of the Progressive Party, Hao Yu-neng of the Nationalist Party, and Kha Van Trieu of the Taiwan People's Party. 5th January 2024, 13:03 +07 Voters in Taiwan will cast their ballots on January 13, 2024, to elect a president and parliament - the Legislative Yuan. Both China and the US are closely monitoring this autonomous island as it holds significant strategic interests for both Washington and Beijing. The results could significantly impact the nature of this island's relationship with China, potentially escalating tensions in the region and affecting the global economic landscape. Incumbent President Tsai Ing-wen of the Progressive Party (DPP) - a party considered separatist by China - is set to step down after two terms, as stipulated in the constitution. Three candidates are vying to succeed her. And the DPP-led alliance hopes to maintain a majority in the 113-member Legislative Yuan, the body empowered to enact laws, approve budgets, declare war, and address other state issues. Who are the candidates?

Image Source, EPA

Image capture, Three candidates posing before a televised debate in Taipei on December 30Lai Ching-te, Progressive Party (DPP) Mr. Lai was previously a doctor and has held most top political positions in Taiwan. He has been the Vice President since 2020. He leads the Pan-Green alliance and broadly supports Taiwan's identity and opposes unification with China. He advocates for closer relations with the US over China. China sees him as a "separatist" with a hardline approach, "much worse than Tsai Ing-wen." But as the voting day approaches, he reiterates Tsai's cautious statement that "Taiwan is already independent, so there is no need to declare anything further." Hao Yu-neng, Nationalist Party (KMT) Mr. Hao is a former police officer. He easily won re-election as the mayor of New Taipei City (the city surrounding the capital Taipei) in 2022 as a moderate and renowned for his competence. He leads the Pan-Blue alliance, advocating for stronger - or even potentially unifying - relations with China. Recently, he stated that he currently prioritizes maintaining the status quo, meaning neither declaring independence nor seeking unification with China. Kha Van Trieu, Taiwan People's Party (TPP) Mr. Kha was a surgeon until he ran for mayor of Taipei, Taiwan's capital, independently in 2014. He established the Taiwan People's Party in 2019, seeing it as a third choice for dissatisfied voters of both the DPP and the Nationalist Party. TPP's stance on Taiwan-China relations remains vague. Negotiations between the Nationalist Party and TPP to secure a joint ticket for the presidential race failed in November.

Image Source, AFP

Image capture, There have been protests against the government in 2023 on issues like housing shortage and high living costsWhat do the people of Taiwan want? Despite tensions between China and Taiwan, studies indicate that many Taiwanese consider economic development a more urgent issue. A 2023 study sponsored by the National Science and Technology Council revealed that 34.2% of those surveyed consider the economy the most urgent concern they want their next president to address. Cross-strait relations with China rank second at 18.1%. People are dissatisfied with issues like low wages, particularly among youth and workers, high living costs, and soaring housing prices. Tsai Ing-wen pledged "a better country for the younger generation" in her 2015 election campaign, but many voters feel she hasn't delivered. The DPP performed poorly in the 2022 local elections, leading to Tsai's resignation as party chair. Many blame the party's poor performance for failing to improve the daily lives of the people. Taiwanese citizens aged 20 and above who have continuously lived on the island for six months are automatically eligible to vote. That means there are around 19 million potential voters. The voter turnout rate in the last election was 75%.

Image Source, Reuters

Image capture, President Joe Biden and President Xi Jinping met at the Filoli estate (California, US) on the sidelines of the APEC summit last November, it's unclear if they discussed Taiwan issuesWho do China and the US want as the new president of Taiwan? Taiwan is about 161 km off the southeast coast of China. Taiwan has been self-governing since the Nationalist Party (KMT), after losing the civil war to the Communist Party, withdrew from the mainland and resettled here in 1949. Decades later, Taiwan transitioned from a dictatorship to a democracy with its own constitution. Most people consider this island different from mainland China. But the Chinese Communist Party sees ultimate control over Taiwan as a matter of national security. President Xi Jinping has repeatedly stated that "reunification" must be achieved - and does not rule out using force to accomplish this. The US increasingly asserts readiness to act to prevent any such military moves. Taiwan lies within the "first island chain" - comprising US allies like Japan, South Korea, the Philippines - which is crucial to US foreign policy. If China were to take over Taiwan, some Western experts argue that it could be more free to project power in the Western Pacific and even threaten far-off US military bases like Guam and Hawaii. However, China insists its intentions are purely peaceful. Currently, opinion polls show DPP candidate Lai Ching-te leading over Hao Yu-neng of the Nationalist Party, with third candidate Kha Van Trieu of the Taiwan People's Party trailing behind. China has increased pressure, frequently sending military ships and aircraft to Taiwan last year and crossing the median line that separates the two sides almost daily.

Image Source, Reuters

Image capture, President Tsai Ing-wen overseeing military training at a reserve military base on Orchid Island in May 2023Can Taiwan defend itself? Most of China's military power is concentrated elsewhere, but concerning the overall number of armed forces, there is a significant disparity between the two sides: in any military confrontation, China's armed forces would outweigh Taiwan's. But that doesn't mean Taiwan is not equipped with quality or unique weapons. After the US shifted diplomatic recognition from Taiwan to China in 1979, the country continued to sell arms to the island under the terms of the Taiwan Relations Act. In July 2023, the US announced a $345 million arms package for Taiwan. Just before the year's end, the US State Department approved the sale of $300 million worth of equipment to help maintain Taiwan's command and control communications system. Back in May 2022, US President Joe Biden was asked if the US would militarily protect Taiwan, to which he replied, "Yes." The White House then emphasized that Washington hasn't altered the "one China policy" it proclaimed. However, China spends a defense budget larger than any country except the US and can employ various





